It may here be noticed that Schedule H drugs are those which can be sold by the chemist only on the prescription of the Doctor but Schedule L drugs are not sold across the counter but are sold only to the hospitals and clinics.
You must judge them, both by their look and by their sound.
Similarly, in Durga Dutt Sharmas case (supra), it was observed that in an action for infringement, the plaintiff must, no doubt, make out that the use of the defendants mark is likely to deceive, but where the similarity between the plaintiffs and the defendants mark is so close either visually, phonetically or otherwise and the court reaches the conclusion that there is an imitation, no further evidence is required to establish that the plaintiffs rights are violated.
The appeal filed by the appellant before the High Court met with no success.
The Division Bench, on an appeal, however, set-aside the decision of the Single Judge and restored the decision of the Deputy Registrar.
The suit related to a medicine being sold under the brand name Falcitab by the respondent which, according to the appellant, was a brand name similar to the drug being sold by it under its brand name Falcigo The case of the appellant was that its drug Falcigo contains Artesunate for the treatment of cerebral malaria commonly known as Falcipharum.
The burden of proving that the trade mark which a person seeks to register is not likely to deceive or to cause confusion is upon the applicant.
c) The nature of the goods in respect of which they are used as trade marks.
It should, however, be borne in mind that the object of the enquiry in ultimate analysis is whether the mark used by the defendant as a whole is deceptively similar to that of the registered mark of the plaintiff.
In other words in the case of un-registered trade marks, a passing off action is maintainable.
On an application to register, the Registrar or an opponent may object that the trade mark is not registrable by reason of clause (a) of Section 8, or sub-section (1) of Section 10, as in this case.
It is well recognised that in deciding a question of similarity between two marks, the marks have to be considered as a whole.
It is, thereafter, that since October, 1996 the appellant claimed to have started the manufacture and sale of drug Falcigo all over India.
The two companies had taken over the assets and business of the erstwhile Cadila Group after its restructuring under Sections 391 & 394 of the Companies Act.
The action for infringement is a statutory remedy conferred on the registered proprietor of a registered trade mark for the vindication of the exclusive right to the use of the trade mark in relation to those goods (Vide S 21 of the Act).
It cannot be overlooked that the word is an English word which to the mass of the Indian people is a foreign word.
When the special leave came up for hearing, detailed arguments were heard and, for the reasons to be given, this Court did not interfere with the orders passed by the courts below but gave directions regarding expeditious disposal of the suit.
The use by the defendant of the trade mark of the plaintiff is not essential in an action for passing off, but is the sine qua non in the case of an action for infringement.
On the facts of that case this Court came to the conclusion that taking into account all circumstances the words Protovit and Dropovit were so dissimilar that there was no reasonable probability of confusion between the words either from visual or phonetic point of view.
This Court elaborated this principle further at page 363 as under: The principles of law applicable to such cases are well-settled.
After discussing various cases which were cited before it and after verifying the cartoons and packings of the respective products, the High Court came to the conclusion that it could not be said that there was a likelihood of confusion being caused to an unwary consumer in respect of the disputed marks.
The trial court will now decide the suit keeping in view the observations made in this judgment.
The Extra Assistant Judge, Vadodara by his order dated 30th May, 1998 dismissed the interim injunction application.
The present proceedings arise from the suit for injunction which had been filed by the appellant against the respondent in the District Court at Vadodara.
Confusion in such products can have serious consequences for the patient.