(c) There was no question of transfer of sovereignty of India wholly or partially in respect of the said area.
We are of the opinion that the Division Bench was pre-eminently right in the conclusion it arrived.
Clause 2:-- "Sovereignty over the leased area shall continue to vest in India.
The Division Bench categorically held that there was no cession of territory and no lease in perpetuity.
As these two enclaves were to remain as part of Bangladesh territory, these two agreements had made some provisions to enable Bangladesh to exercise its sover- eignty in full over these two enclaves.
In the agreement of 1974, it was only recorded that India would lease in perpetuity to Bangladesh the said area at Teen Bigha to connect Dahagram and Panbari Mouza of Bangladesh.
In 1983, writ petitions were filed in the Calcutta High Court.
The Division Bench in judgment under appeal affirmed the decision of the learned Single Judge.
The findings and interpretation of the agree- ments of 1974 and 1982 were also not disputed before us.
This Act came into force on and from 15th August, 1947, which was the appointed day and under the Act, as from the appointed day, two independent dominions were to be set up in place of the existing India known, respectively as 'India' and 'Pakistan'.
Consequently, Dahagram and Angarpota remained and still remain part of the territory of East Pakistan and subsequently Bangladesh.
After the parti- tion, Berubari Union formed part of the State of West Bengal and had been governed as such.
The use of the expression 'lease in perpetuity' in the recital of the agreement of 1982 and whether such recital operates as an estoppel against the parties is not of par- ticular significance.
The Prime Ministers of two countries entered into an agreement settling certain dis- putes including the Bernbari Union and the enclaves in the East Pakistan in 1958.
In the instant case, the major right which had been conferred on Bangladesh was the right of free movement over the area.
1t was open to India and Bangladesh to enter into a fresh treaty modifying the 1958 agreement and that was actually what had happened in the present case.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, the decision to allow Bangladesh to retain Dahagram and Angarpota does not amount to cession of Indian territory in favour of Bangladesh.
The Division Bench of Calcutta High Court correctly noted that the learned Single Judge came to the following conclusions: (a) Implementation of the agreements of 1974 and 1982 did not involve cession of any Indian territory to Bangla- desh.
Ninth amend- ment had not become part of the Constitution as no appointed date was notified.
The question, is, whether to the extent as aforesaid, a further amendment to the Constitution was necessary.
No constitutional amendment was necessary in view of the fact that 9th amendment had not come into effect as there was no appointed day fixed by the Parliament and the principles enunciated by the decision of this Court in AK Roy's case (supra).
The Division Bench noted that so far as the western border of India and Pakistan is concerned, the agreement of 1958 between India and Pakistan has been given effect to.
The Division Bench held that under the said agreements, specific and limited rights were being granted to Bangladesh.
Having examined the rights in the agreements, we are of the opinion that this did not amount to lease or surrender of sovereignty as understood in the international law.
This meant that Bangladesh would not exercise sovereignty over the said area.
Subsequently, certain boundary disputes arose between India and Pakistan and a Tribunal was set up for the adjudication and final decision of the said disputes.
This position has been recognised by both the Governments of India and Bangladesh in the two subsequent agreements of 1974 and 1982.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SABYASACHI MUKHARJI, CJ.
In that view of the matter, the nomenclature used and the expressions recorded would not by themselves be of much significance.
The concessions given to Bangla- desh over the said area might amount to servitudes suffered by India in its territory, as known in international law.
Thus, the implementation of these two agreements, so far as Teen Bigha was concerned, did not amount to cession of the said territory or transfer of sovereignty in respect of the same and did not require any constitutional amendment.
The Court having held that 9th Amend- ment to the Constitution has not come into effect and there being no cession of any part or territory or abandonment of sovereignty, there was no cause to direct the legislature to amend or pass suitable laws.
The Act amended the Constitution to give effect to the transfer of those territories.
The subsequent agreement of 1982 was entered into between the two countries for imple- menting the earlier agreement of 1974 and had to be con- strued in the background of the latter.
This is not the position or the situation which is contemplated under the agreements.
We are of the opinion that the directions of the Divi- sion Bench of the Calcutta High Court to that extent may be deleted in clause (a) of the ordering portion.
Problem arose subsequently regarding the Berubari Union No. 12 Which was situated in the Police Station Jalpaiguri in the District of Jalpaiguri, which was at the relevant time a part of Raisahi Division of Bengal.
This point, accord- ing to the Division Bench was of little substance.
The Division Bench expressed the view that perhaps the letters of the two countries will take remedial measures.
The next question that falls for consideration is wheth- er the agreement of 1958 between India and Pakistan which was sanctioned by the Ninth Amendment to the Constitution in 1960 became a final treaty binding on India and Bangladesh.
The said expression in clause 9 refers to nothing more than the jurisdiction to be exercised by India in respect of incident occurring in the said territory involving law and order, which may or may not amount to.
The Division Bench was unable to accept the contention that the use of the expression 'residual jurisdiction' in clause 9 of the agreement of 1982 indicates that India only retained residual sovereignty over the area and the defacto and real sovereignty in the said area has been surrendered to Bangladesh.
(f) In spite of the said agreements India would retain its sovereignty, ownership and control over Tin Bigha.
On a construction of the agreement, the Division Bench came to the conclusion that the agreements of 1974 and 1982 together in their entirety keeping in view the background must be judged.
If that is the position, then undiputedly there was no question of cession of any part or any territory by the agreements of 1974 and 1982.
The Constitution of India was declared to be passed on 26th November, 1949.
All the contentions were noted by Mr. Justice DK Sen, as the learned Chief Justice then was, who delivered the main judgment of the Division Bench in the judgment under appeal.
This Court had reiter- ated there that a treaty really concerned the political rather than the judicial wing of the State.
The older and absolute ideas of sovereignty and independence has thus necessarily to be modified in the dawn of the 21st century.
No right to administer the said territory had been given to Bangladesh.
Having regard to the facts found and the position of law, we are of the opinion that the High Court was right in this aspect of the conclusion.
Two items in Para 2 of the said Agreement were items 3 and 10.
Soli J Sorabjee, Attorney General and NS Hegde, Additional Solicitor General, Gopal Subramanium, Ms. A Subhashini and P Parmeshwaran for the Appellants.
But the said question was raised by the Government of Pakistan in the year 1952.
The appeal is disposed of in the aforesaid light and deleting the aforesaid directions of the Division Bench and the appeal is allowed to the extent.