The socially and educationally backward classes of citizens are groups other than groups based on caste."
(a) Whether the 50% rule enunciated in Balaji a binding rule or only a rule of caution or rule of prudence?
Decided cases of this Court have no doubt laid down that the percentage of reservation should not exceed 50%.
Whether the reservation of 10% of the posts in favour of 'other economically backward sections of the people who are not covered by any of the existing schemes of the reservations' made by the Office Memorandum dated 2591991 permissible under Article 16?
It would not be correct to say that the backwardness under Article 16(4) should be both social and educational.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children.
Consequently what comes out of the examination from different aspects leads to conclusion that: (1) Backward class in Article 16(4) cannot be read as backward caste.
Clause (ii) of the Office Memorandum dated September 25, 1991 is held invalid and inoperative.
The matter was then taken to the Supreme Court in the Vasanth Kumar's case.
In short, the goal is "equality of status and of opportunity".
(12) The reservation of 10% of the vacancies in civil posts and Services in favour of other economically backward sections of the people who are not covered by any other scheme of the reservation as mentioned in para 2(ii) of the impugned amended Officer Memorandum dated 25th September 1991 is constitutionally invalid and it is accordingly struck down.
The percentage of reservation at the maximum of 50% is neither based on scientific data nor on any established and agreed formula.
Thereafter, a number of CMPs in the writ petitions for extension of time for implementation of this Court's directions were filed.
The distinction should be on the basis of degrees of social backwardness.
It is argued before us that the observations on the said question in Thomas were obiter and do not constitute a decision so as to have the effect of overruling Balaji.
The very use of the word "provision" in Article 16(4) is significant.
Yet because of extraneous reasons the government had to bow and include them in the list of backward classes.
Use of expression, 'nothing in this Article shall prevent Parliament' in Article 16(4) cannot be read as empowering the State to make reservation under Article 16(4) on race, religion or caste.
Both the provisions have to be harmonised keeping in mind the fact that both are but the restatements of the principle of equality enshrined in Article 14.
Any attempt to perpetuate reservation and upset the constitutional mandate of equality is destructive of liberty and fraternity and all the basic values enshrined in the Constitution.
(3) The expression, 'backward class of citizens' occurring in Article 16(4) is neither defined nor explained in the Constitution.
However, it appears that the learned Judge has not said that the entire reservation should go only to the more backward classes but only some percentage of reservation should be provided and earmarked exclusively for the more backward classes.
The only difference being that the rigour of caste varies from religion to religion and from region to region.
The grant of licences was to be based on 'public convenience, interest or necessity'.
The makers of the Constitution were fully conscious of the unfortunate position of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The length of the leap to be provided depends upon the gap to be covered.
It is only in case of denial of such preferential treatment, the very concept of equality as enshrined in the Constitution, will get buried 50 fathoms deep.
The impugned Government orders, have made reservation by setting aside quotas in Government services exclusively for backward classes of candidates.

For the same reasons the observation of Fazal Ali, J in Thomas (supra), ...Decided cases 01 this Court have no doubt laid down that the percentage of reservation should not exceed 50%.