The application was heard on 27.6.2007 and Order rejecting pre-grant opposition was made on 4.7.2007.
The defendant firstly, contends that the plaintiff's patent claim lacks an inventive step.
Therefore ,I held that the invention cannot be held non-patentable under Section 3(d) of the Patents Act, 1970.
Learned Counsel submitted that the plaintiff's patent was wrongly granted and is liable to be revoked because of obviousness and lack of inventive step.
It is urged that Erlotinib is not a derivative of a known substance.
The patent is subject to scrutiny at several higher levels, unlike in the case of trademarks.
Hence, the Defendant's contentions in this regard are irrelevant and misleading.
It is next contended that the patent does not reveal any obvious inventive step.
Under such circumstances, the Defendant submits, the patent office ought not to have granted a patent for Erlotinib.
The Plaintiffs patent is for a new compound, and has an ethynyl group instead of the methyl group.
The court should refrain from conducting a mini trial as to the strength of the parties, at the interlocutory stage.
b) Counsel contends that there is non-disclosure of various patents filed by the plaintiff in the US and in India.
The inventive step claimed is the methyl substitute is in the third position.
JUDGMENT S Ravindra Bhat, J. This order disposes of IA 642/2008, an application seeking ad-interim injunction, restraining the defendant from manufacturing, offering for sale, selling and exporting the drug Erlotinib, for which the plaintiff holds a patent.
The patent in this case was granted after due application of mind.
The defendant's argument is that the above substitution is obvious to a person skilled in the art; and that this has not been answered by the plaintiff, who merely argues that the said substitution is not contained in documents relied upon by the defendant and hence the patent is not bad.
He discounted the price differential between the plaintiffs Tarceva and the defendant's product Erlotinib as being 'dangerous' and 'jingoistic'.
The damage or injury that would occur to the plaintiff in such case is capable of assessment in monetary terms.
The Defendant also adverted to the alleged non-working of the patent.
The ground that the patent is new is hardly relevant; it has to be afforded protection, through an appropriate injunction in an action for infringement, wherever the plaintiff can establish its case.
Even the US FDA approval was obtained in 2004 that establishes that the Product and the patent are new and to be treated as such.