These cases arise out of Writ Petitions which were originally filed under Article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Sikkim and have been transferred to this Court for disposal under Article 139A of the Constitution.
however, urged that Clause (f) of Article 371-F imposes an obligation on Parliament to make provision for protection of the rights and interests of Sikkimese of Nepali origin also and that while making reservation for protection of rights and interest of Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha origin, Parliament was also required to provide for similar reservation of seats for Sikkimese of Nepali origin to protect the rights and interests of Sikkimese of Napalis origin.
It is, however, urged that a law made under Article containing the terms and conditions on which a new State is admitted in the Indian Union is, by its very nature, political involving matters of policy and, therefore, the terms and conditions contained in such law are not justiciable.
This is clearly violative of the basic features of the Constitution.
to the total number of seats as the population of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the State in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State.
The second contention relating to the extent of the reservation of seats for Bhutias and Lepchas is based on the provisions of Article 332 (3) of the Constitution.
Accordingly the Constitution was further amended by the Constitution (Thirty-Sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 which became effective in May, 1975.
The scope of the power conferred by Article 371-F, is therefore, subject to judicial review.
To assail the validity of these provisions Shri Jain has urged that the provision in s7(1-A)(c) of the 1950 Act is violative of the right guaranteed under Article 15(1) of the Constitution inasmuch as by reserving one seat for Sanghas (Budhist Lamas), the State has discriminated against a person who is not a Budhist on the ground only of religion.
These issues arise in the context of the admission of Sikkim into the Indian Union under the Constitution (36th Amendment) Act, 1975 as the 22nd State in the First Schedule of the Constitution of India.
It has to be remembered that if the Constitution is so interpreted as to permit, by an amendment a seat to be reserved in the legislature for a group of religious institutions like the Buddhist Monasteries, it will follow that such a reservation would be permissible for institutions belonging to other religions also.
The non-obstante clause in Article 371-F read with clause (f) of the said Article enlarges the filled of deviation in the matter of reservation of seats from the proportion laid down in Article 332(3).
The words "as it thinks fit" in Article 2 of the Constitution cannot, therefore, be construed as empowering Parliament to provide terms and conditions for admission of a new State which are inconsistent with the basic features of the Constitution.
I, accordingly, hold that the provisions of section 25A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 are also ultra vires the Constitution and this furnishes another ground to strike down section 7 (1 A) (c).
Referring to Articles 2 and 4 of the Constitution it has been urged that the admission into the Union of India is permissible without a constitutional amendment and the terms and conditions of such admission are not open to scrutiny by the courts.
This goal cannot be achieved by merely allotting each person one vote which they can cast in favour of a particular candidate or a special group of persons, selected for this purpose by others, in which they have no say.
Such a reservation which is expressly permitted by the Constitution cannot be challenged on the ground of denial of right to equality guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
On the independence of India in 1947 there was a public demand in Sikkim for merger with India which was resisted by the Rulers.
The submission of Shri Jain is that these provisions are inconsistent with the concept of secularism which is a basic feature of the Constitution.
The writ petitioner contends that the impugned provisions of the Representation of the People Acts arc ultra times of' the Constitution and cannot be saved by Article 37IF(f).
Thereafter Parliament enacted the 1976 Act to provide for the extension of the 1950 Act and the 1951 Act to the State of Sikkim and introduced certain special provisions in the 1950 Act and the 1951 Act in their application to Sikkim.